The Project Gutenberg eBook of The sleeper is a rebel, by Bryce
Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The sleeper is a rebel

Author: Bryce Walton

Release Date: January 13, 2023 [eBook #69778]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLEEPER IS A REBEL ***





                        The Sleeper Is a Rebel

                            By BRYCE WALTON

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Thrilling Wonder Stories February 1948.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                               CHAPTER I

                              _Surrender_


With bitter resignation Deker faced the two immaculately clothed Psych
Staffmen. His figure was gaunt, wild, that of a savage anachronism. His
dirt-caked face cracked in a wry smile.

The staffmen's faces showed fear.

"I'm surrendering," Deker said. "I thought I could live alone, but I
couldn't. My abnormality isn't that kind."

Their fears of violence placated, the two Psychos led him to the small
waiting gyro. He sat between them and watched the wild expanse of
forest diminish beneath them as they headed for City Three. It had been
a dangerous freedom in the sea of unsullied North American forest,
living precariously from what he could squeeze from a well-stocked but
selfish Nature. He had almost starved for a while, until he had learned
the rudiments of survival.

And then--the brooding loneliness.

Man cannot live alone. He is a social animal. But Deker was also
an off-sized cog, a misfit that would never find a place in the
perfectionistic mechanism of the Hundred Cities Utopian Federation.

"You will volunteer for the Experimental Labs of course," the man on
his right said. "Scientist Brenn needs volunteers. I can't understand
why you haven't accepted Nirvana before this, Deker! Ordinarily, an
Abnormal is more than willing to accept it. It's for the good of the
Federation, you know!"

"I know," said Deker acrimoniously.

The Federation was the only thing that mattered. A lone, maladjusted
pariah labeled Deker didn't matter. From the time the individuals
of the Federation were artificially semenated, placed in a row of
generation jars in the Embryo wards, they were conditioned to take
their predestined place in the social machinery.

But if an abnormality, a misfit, appeared he was tolerated, though
socially ostracized, psychologically forced to volunteer to be done
away with, legally. "Nirvana"--a kind, soft word for extermination.

They didn't kill you, for such a thing would be unthinkable in the
perfect order. One slept, was put to permanent gelid sleep in Brenn's
encystment capsule. Deker had tried to escape. But there was no escape
for an _abnormal_. Nothing but Nirvana....

       *       *       *       *       *

Deker stood, looking across a gleaming desk at the head of the Psych
Council for City Three. From having been here for consultation many
times before, Deker knew this man's name as Jak. He was eighty years
old, though his voice and face were still young, virile, enthusiastic.
The Conditioners did well.

"You surrendered voluntarily," Jak said, his eyes unwaveringly on
Deker's. "It's fortunate that your ill-advised attempt to escape ended
so amicably."

Deker's thin lips curled. "I wonder if you've considered the fact that
your 'perfect' system is responsible for me, an imperfection?"

"Of course. But this is only Twenty-one-sixty A.D. At this early
stage we must expect incidental imperfections. The Federation is only
two centuries old. It's the glorious whole of our Hundred Cities one
must consider. A little too much thyroxine injection, or a slight
irregularity in the saltine schedule, and you resulted. A martyr to
the ultimate planned perfection of the Hundred Cities! If only you had
reacted properly to the Conditioners!"

Deker walked to the great window over-looking Bellamy Square. Yes,
outwardly it was Bellamy's Utopian dream. But.... He turned back toward
Jak.

"For five years I forced myself to be a lathe worker. But I hated it.
So to compensate, I illegally studied books, all the books I could
get, and that made me even more maladjusted. You speak of perfection!
But we're physico-chemical structures. We're variable, subject to
unpredictable alterations. I'm one of many abnormals decanted from the
wards. Perhaps only small insignificant errors. But you have no way
of foreseeing or preventing big errors, Jak! It's tinsel veneering. A
house of glittering sound."

Jak shook his head sadly. "Too bad they don't proceed with the
space-flight development. A splendid release for your type. But no
benefit to the Federation, so it must be dropped. However, I'm glad
you've volunteered for Nirvana. Brenn badly needs more subjects for his
suspended animation experiments."

Deker remembered then how desperately they had tried to correct their
decanting error by reconditioning processes. The individual was
conditioned from prenatal stage on to perform specific tasks in the
social machinery, and he was also conditioned to think that specific
task simply wonderful. But not for Deker. He was too negativistic. The
machinery droning over and over into his brain, month after futile
month those words:

"The lathe worker is the most necessary worker in the Federation. No
other worker is so important as those who operate the lathes. I'm proud
to be a lathe worker." Or: "I'm so very, very glad I'm a lathe worker."
Or again: "I could never, never be anything but a lathe worker."

Deker looked at Jak. "You labeled me a negativist. Because after five
years of that, I decided that being a lathe worker was about the most
sorry job a human being could have, in this socialized futility."

Jak exuded sympathy from his clear eager eyes.

"For you, yes," he agreed. "That's why it is best for you and the
Federation that you accept Nirvana. It's too bad, really, that the
Federation cannot use you. Potentially, you have a high-A mental
capacity. But you've destroyed any possibility of specialization by the
secret studying you did during those years you worked on your lathe.
Generalized knowledge is dead."

After an empty, painful silence Deker said: "I'm ready to go, Jak.
I've never even been smiled at by a woman and my life's a third gone.
I think that has decided me more than anything else. Imagine how you
would feel if every woman stared and shied away from you as though you
were some kind of animal out of a zoo!"

Jak coughed, motioned. The two staffmen entered.

"Good-by, Deker," Jak said. "You may go into the experimental labs
happily, knowing you are contributing to the ultimate and eternal glory
of the Federation."

Deker walked out between them, was taken to the scientist, Brenn.
Enroute, he saw or heard little because of a shock-absorbing haze of
amnesia. A haze that broke immediately when he met Brenn for the first
time and became aware of a startling, stunning fact:

Brenn, himself, was an Abnormal!

Brenn was motioning nervously about his laboratory, after the
two staffmen had left. Motioning at the elaborate machinery, the
time-encystment capsules suspended from the ceiling like pendular
streamlined coffins.

       *       *       *       *       *

Small, erratic, in soiled plastic working gown, Brenn was a man
whose eyes gleamed with secrecy. Small, blue-veined hands twisted
constantly. Deker couldn't believe it. Brenn, one of the Federation's
top ranking research psych-physicists, an Abnormal! Surely the Class
One Intellectuals knew!

"You recognize me for what I am, Deker," Brenn said. "So do they. But
they can't prove it, officially. But I'm a different kind of Abnormal
than you and these others asleep in my capsules. Mine isn't a result
of physiological error during embryo or prenatal. In spite of the
Conditioners, I developed high degree insight and free agency. I've
been able to conceal my abnormality deliberately and make a socially
acceptable adjustment. You could have done the same--with insight." He
added with a sly wink, "_Many have._"

Brenn commenced pacing the length of the time-vault.

"I've explained to the others before I put them in stasis," he said. "I
can explain to you now."

Deker dropped down on an alloy bench, slightly dizzy with amazement.

"Deker," Brenn went on, "you have probably realized that the Federation
is a silly dream punctured with holes. The fabric glitters, but it's
false."

Deker nodded. The scientist continued in a grave tone:

"Created out of desperation because of the sudden mastery of
basic energies, the World Federation seeks final standardization,
socialization, as the only defense against self-annihilation. That's
wrong. It will be solved by individual development or not at all.
At any time incurable inherent factors in human nature may spawn a
will-to-power fanatic who, with knowledge of basic energy, can destroy
all our wonderful Hundred Cities overnight. There are, for example, the
Anarchs."

Deker stared at Brenn, his amazement growing.

"You're surprised that there actually is an underground organization
of Anarchs? So would be many others. And there may be other
organizations and individuals who are not a part of the Federated
system. Destructives. That's why I'm working with my experiments here
in suspended animation. You sleepers may survive the disaster."

Deker looked around as Brenn paused. Eleven capsules were suspended
from the low metal ceiling. Inside each capsule, a body, a freak, an
Abnormal from prenatal and embryo wards. Each body would live, unaging,
while it was administered to properly. Suspended animation.

"You see," said Brenn, enjoying the dramatic effect. "I'm responsible
for you. For you and those others here in the capsules. I intentionally
caused your abnormalities!"

Deker was immunized now to shock. He only blinked.

"By my Class One rating," explained Brenn, "I have been legally
admitted to the embryo wards whenever I desired. Secretly I caused
the alterations in certain normally developing embryos. I caused
teratological freaks to emerge instead of sponges for the colorless
liquids poured from the conditioning machines. Physically, I'll admit
some of the results are ugly." He indicated the hanging capsules. "In
that capsule sleeps a two-headed man. There, a hunchback; and there, a
Cyclopean monster with three eyes and a ferocious temper. There is an
albino, a trembling raw lump of sensitivity. There is one who almost
sprouted wings and became a birdman. Like you, some are only mentally
distorted. Remember the woman, Shar, who tried to commit suicide? She's
here."

Deker couldn't hate Brenn. Even being a twisted freak was preferable to
being a mindless child of the Conditioners, happy because of a total
lack of free associative thought.

"Individuals and organizations like the Anarchs," said Brenn, "could
destroy all the Hundred Cities of Utopia overnight. Civilization as we
recognize it now may not survive. But my hope is that you will. This
vault is surrounded by tons of protective sheeting. I needed subjects
for this experiment in suspended animation, and used the only legal
method there was for obtaining them."

"And you?" asked Deker.

"No importance. I will die. Humanity must persist! That's the only
thing that matters. The position of humans will at times become so
precarious that survival will seem impossible. But humanity will keep
driving forward, Deker. It must. I'm putting my faith in that."

Brenn explained something about the encystment principle. Temperature
mean down to 7.1 degrees centigrade. Could go on living indefinitely.
Human organism a chemical complex. His life short and fast, because
it's hot. But all these suspended sleepers were cold, cold.

But Deker had lost interest. He was tired. He wanted escape. Nirvana.
And later, out-stretched within the capsule, he hardly realized that
his consciousness was beginning to fade.

A sharp strange odor closed over his face like a sticky gas. Brilliant
flashes of light circled round and round his head like bursting novae.
He was swimming in a pool of dark red. It was like blood, only it was
thin and wonderfully cool. Slowly and more slowly he swam until he was
floating weightless, looking up into an endlessly swirling green mist.

Then somewhere a bell clanged loudly. It rang three times.




                              CHAPTER II

                           _The Gods Awake_


Deker floated on the red sea long after he began hearing the bell. And
he knew that the key threshold which Brenn had left open for activation
had been stimulated. Sometime later, he was fully conscious.

He stretched his body, felt the strong new pumping of blood that had
been flowing with such infinite slowness. Flooding oxygen lifted him to
his elbows with a dizzy exuberance. He pressed a stud, and the cowling
above the capsule slid back noiselessly. Deker climbed out onto the
vault floor.

One by one the others were climbing from their capsules, transforming
the metal-lined vault abruptly into a weird distorted nightmare. The
hunchback swung his stocky, humped figure to the floor on enormous
arms. He stood uncertainly a moment, running big hands through a bush
of black hair. He smiled with sardonic humor on his gargoyle face,
motioned with a sweeping gesture toward the others.

The two-headed man, both heads mis-shapen and ugly, groaned softly.
He opened his two pairs of pain-raddled eyes, glared at Deker and the
hunchback, then buried the eyes in thin pale arms.

"He's always in pain," the hunchback explained with easy friendliness.
"They kept him doped with hypnosene for years before he finally
consented to accept Nirvana. Nothing here in the vault to alleviate his
pain. And who knows what's outside?"

The white-haired albino came hopping nervously across the floor, waving
red hands, sighing with fear. The giant three-eyed man's middle eye was
a bright, evil glare.

The manic-depressive, Shar, who had tried to commit suicide by jumping
from City Three's highest building, walked past the Cyclops and stood
close to Deker. Black, feverish eyes matched the shining black of her
hair. Deker saw nothing except the moist full redness of her lips.

There were others--drab, colorless women, an insignificant little
bald-headed man, and the man who had almost grown wings. But the
slightly clothed figure of the woman, Shar, demanded most of Deker's
attention.

"Who are you, friend?" the hunchback said in a deep rich basso. "I'm
Gans."

"Deker." He walked a few steps back and forth, tentatively. Feeling was
still coming into his limbs.

"No sign of Brenn, so at least we must have slept longer than he
lived," suggested Shar in a deep, husky voice. She shifted her hips
sinuously.

"Or maybe he's outside the vault," whispered Deker harshly, watching
Shar. She also watched him. No woman had ever looked at Deker that way.

"True," said the hunchback. "These opaque sections allow the morbidly
curious to see inside, though we can't see out. I wonder how long it's
been?"

The distorted face grinned. And, surprisingly enough, he began to sing.
A deep, droning chant. He began swinging his arms with the music. Shar
undulated nearer Deker.

"Well"--her ripe lips curled with bitter malice--"Brenn's failed us."

Her arms swept round the interior of the vault. There were no openings
in it other than the tightly-sealed series of three heavy metal doors.
Deker could still hear the steady beat of the metronome.

"We're right back in reality again," she said and, with her eyes on
Deker, she added softly, "But reality can be interesting, sometimes."

Deker shook off part of the woman's spell with an uneasy laugh.

"Reality," he said. "Only time gives it meaning. But for us--we could
have been in suspended animation for ten seconds, or ten million years."

Shar looked at him oddly. "You came in here after we did. Did you
volunteer for this trap?"

Deker's solid line of eyebrow wriggled like a caterpillar. "I
volunteered. Finally."

The albino, squealing in high falsetto, scuttled across the floor.

"Listen, the metronome's stopped! That means the whole thing's quit!"
He ran wildly around the base of the smooth walls, scurrying like a
giant white rat.

"Take it easy, Red," cautioned Deker. "We can get out. They can see us
in here, and we've been revived only a little while."

Shar slid over, leaned against him. He had never had a woman do that
before. Not in reality.

The Cyclops shambled over toward him, his middle eye blazing anger,
and Shar moved away, looking both frightened and pleased. Deker
moved between Shar and the Cyclops. The middle eye shone with a blind
insensate jealousy.

"Shar is mine," the Cyclops said sullenly. "Mine."

"Are you?" Deker asked Shar.

       *       *       *       *       *

The albino was huddled in a far corner. The hunchback was singing
again. The two-headed man was sitting on the vault floor, a head in
each hand, moaning.

"I don't belong to anyone," Shar replied. Her eyes blinked slowly at
Deker. "Yet."

The metal door opposite Deker began sliding open slowly. Every eye
turned toward it, each one breathlessly waiting. The lower half of
the door was dark, the upper part of the oval a deep soft blue, and
a little to the left of the horizon line, a full red moon shone. A
cold wind entered, and the sparsely clothed freaks shivered. Otherwise
nothing happened, then.

Standing there, Deker suffered a strange thrill. Things were so
different now. Even a woman, Shar, desired him. Among these freaks
he was certainly the most desirable in a physical sense. With sudden
surging enthusiasm he realized that he had escaped!

They all undoubtedly were in a far future time now. And surely this new
era, whenever and whatever it was, held new hope and promise for him!

"Everything's changed out there," squealed the frightened albino,
nervously. "City Three was never cold. And we can see the sky, and the
moon too. When we came into this vault we were buried in the very heart
of City Three. Now we're in the open."

And the hunchback's deep voice sang. He improvised, sometimes in free
verse, sometimes in rhyme, as the mood hit him:

    The sky is blue with cold, and bitter is the wind.
    The moon is red, blood-red is the moon.
    The cold wind blows where once the City rose.
    And what has happened to the world we knew?
    Now, no one knows.

Staring at the hunchback, Deker felt something of the situation's
timeless fantasy, the abnormality. Lost in time. Unsuited perhaps to
any era except some legendary scene. This hunchback might be some sly
jester from the court of an ancient king; the girl, Shar, a frustrated
princess escaped from a tower. And the others, the teratological
freaks, seemed part of a dusty mythology.

A wind sighed from the strange and otherwise silent world outside,
bringing a cloud of fine dust. Shar cowered against Deker.
Instinctively he held her tightly, felt deeply her warm, slightly
tremulous flesh. It was difficult now to remember the Hundred Cities
Utopian Federation. Dead, buried, forgotten, the perfect order. Or was
it?

Then they heard the weird chanting of many voices outside the vault.
The gong sounded again, much louder. Then the chanting rose to a
fanatical droning dirge.

"Let's go," said Deker. He kept his arm about Shar and led the others
toward the exit. But the Cyclops stayed beside Shar, eyes balefully
on Deker. The others fell cowering behind, the albino moaning, the
two-headed man stumbling with pain. There were fifty feet of metal
passageway before they stood in the ruin of the final exit. The
chanting stopped.

A single wailing voice intoned:

"The gods have awakened! Hail, all hail god Deker. Our salvation and
our light!"

Deker peered through the moonlight. A thin, ragged figure stood before
a mass of prone bodies that quivered with emotion like the surface of a
lake. Behind them towered the jagged pattern of a colossal and terribly
twisted ruins. The voice droned on:

"Hail to Him of the Three Eyes of the All-Seeing Vision! Hail to the
Two-Headed One of Wisdom! Hail to the Dark Goddess! Hail to the Gnarled
One, the Storm Chief! Hail to the White One who knows of the evil
things that crawl beneath the Earth!

"Begin the sacrifice. Blood shall bathe the City's ruins. Offer up
yourselves to the gods who have arisen to save us from--the beasts!"

A roar rose up from the bowed bodies.

"Hail the gods who will conquer the Beasts that Run in the Night!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Deker shivered against the cold wind and the brittle red moonlight. And
against something he could not name. Shar trembled against him, and the
hunchback ran a hairy hand over his thick lips.

To Deker's right, three bent peeled poles leaned together, supporting
the huge gong. Two ragged figures stood beside it with clubs in their
hands. It was difficult to make out details characterizing the horde
groveling on the slope that stretched from the vault into a dark valley
of warped metal and molten plastic. The vault was still covered with
the mountain of protective sheeting. Brenn had indeed prepared well for
the holocaust.

The small filthy-bearded man who had been exhorting the horde, ran and
fell on his face at Deker's feet. The moonlight reflected his gleaming
fanatical eyes. Eyes with little intelligence; only superstitious awe.
An aged cracked voice climbed up in trembling ecstasy.

"God Deker of the City that Was, and of The City that Shall be Again,
your people who have waited long for your awakening welcome you!"

He beat his forehead a number of times, then scurried crablike backward
before turning and again facing the horde of kneeling worshipers.

"Let the sacrificial fires burn brighter than the moon!" he screamed.
"There need never again be fear. The Temple Gods of Brenn will protect
us!"

Deker turned toward the gnarled ruins in the valley. He shuddered as
his eyes lost themselves among those starkly wrenched remains of what
had once been the gleaming structures of City Three. His eyes probed
blindly into the impenetrable blackness beyond.

He turned. Behind him the others were whispering, staring, stunned with
inability to comprehend.

"Don't leave the vault yet," cautioned Deker, "until we make sure of
what's going on."

The hunchback laughed heavily, then he sang again. Deker was shaken by
the weird unreality of their circumstances as the man sang:

    Out of the sable night of time
    The dead gods rise to battle beasts and find
    Salvation for the ragged ones who keep
    The sacrificial flames afire!

The fires leaped into roaring life, blown into erratic patterns by the
mountain winds. Strange contorted dances began. After a few moments of
discussion on the part of the gods, two haggled creatures in roughly
dyed robes of several brilliant colors, led the arisen sleepers to a
crude platform of stones and metal over-looking the sacrificial ritual.
It wasn't far from the vault, to which they could return if necessary.

From his Olympus, Deker and his godlings looked down.




                              CHAPTER III

                             _The Beasts_


Through pools of red moonlight, hysterical screaming celebrants twisted
and leaped. Altar fires flared and, in the light, showed the quivering
faces of those who wailed with released fear. Around the altars, stones
ran deep with the darkest red of all.

It was a far cry from the dignified perfection of City Three, yet these
yammering savages were still human. And so was Deker. The wailing
rhythm was a bitter-sweet poison in his brain. His blood ran hotly and
his temples throbbed.

He looked at Shar. She was bent forward. Her face was highlighted
shadow, flushed and terror-stricken with an instinctive fascination.
The albino cringed with his pinkish hands on either side of his chin
like a rat's paws. The two-headed man groaned, unimpressed by the
ritual. He was too pain-raddled to care. In this savage environment, he
couldn't survive long. But for that matter would any of them?

The hunchback, whom these savages had labeled "The Gnarled One, God of
The Storm," swayed sensually to the pristine dirge. His long arms swung.

The "Temple Gods of Brenn" had been seated with Deker in front, Shar,
the hunchback, and the Cyclops beside him, the others indistinct
behind. Two high priests stood a few feet from Deker. He had questioned
them. They chanted an alternating answer while the Cyclops kept his
eyes fixed on Deker, waiting.

Priest I: "The lightning gods of the Anarchs brought their bolts from
the skies and the great cities melted in the supernal sun fires."

Priest II: "Long have we waited for the awakening of the gods. Now
shall the Anarchs die within their glowing shields."

Priest I: "The Beasts that Run in the Night shall be driven back into
the mountains beside the blue river and shall never again dare attack
us and eat our women and children."

Priest II: "Faithfully the Priests of Brenn have kept the altar fires."

Priest I: "Protect us against the Anarchs and the Beasts and the
Roaring Winds, and the Ice, and the Burning Death that comes from the
Ruins."

Priest II: "We have fulfilled the Prophecy of Brenn. His temple has
been kept inviolate. The cities of the Utopes shall reach again to the
stars."

A wail of sonorous supplication rose in mighty chorus:

"Hail, all hail, the Temple Gods of Brenn!"

The high priests draped the gods in fur robes to protect them from
the cold, a long-haired white one for Deker, a tawny yellow and
black-striped skin for Shar. The alternating black matched the black of
her eyes and the blue-black of her hair.

"Shar," said Deker, "this sickens me. I'm not atavistic enough to
appreciate it."

Shar said nothing. Intently, unalterably fascinated by the bloody
spectacle before her, she stared, and her fists were clenched, her full
lips taut. Deker shrugged and shifted away from her, hardly knowing
that he was doing it. There seemed to be something about this primitive
libation that was fully appreciated by Shar's feminine masochism. She
had been even more abnormal in that Utopian past than he. For even to
him, self-destruction had been unthinkable. At least he had volunteered
for Nirvana instead of being compelled to accept it. Shar was truly
primitive.

Yet if all the feminine remains of the Hundred Cities were as these
yammering troglodytes, then Shar was perhaps the only woman in the
world for him. But he shook her from his immediate mind. The decay
of the Federation had been only a matter of time and fate, as he had
known. But what had contributed directly to the final devastation?

"The lightning gods of the Anarchs."

Brenn had mentioned an underground of Anarchs who still carried on some
esoteric cultish worship of their individualistic philosophy as opposed
to the strict socialism of the Federation.

"The Anarchs brought their bolts from the skies and the great cities
melted in the supernal sun fires."

Evidently the utilization of basic atomic energies to destroy the
Federation which Brenn had mentioned as a possibility had become
catastrophic reality. The will-to-power fanaticism--they hadn't
been able to condition that out of certain stubborn inherent
characteristics. The Anarchs, then, had struck unexpectedly, destroyed
the rigidly disciplined collectivism they had despised for so long.

With a soft ironic laugh, Deker recalled the code of the Utopes who had
established the Hundred Cities Federation from the stuff dreams were
then made of. Something from the works of Bellamy:

    With a tear for the dark past, turn we then to the dazzling future,
    and veiling our eyes, press forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fanatical chanting came back to him, the quivering filthy faces,
the sea of leaping, whirling celebrants. This--this was the dazzling
future. An Utopian thought it had been, to attempt to escape from an
imperfect society into one conceived to fulfill ideal human values.
But the word, Utopia, was from an ancient race, the Greeks, and
significantly enough meant: "Nowhere."

They had ignored the temper of individuals, variable human
nature--which they had thought to control by conditioning--or the
inevitable opposition of entrenched groups such as the Anarchs. And now
that magnificent but deluded civilization had been reduced to a pack of
shivering, superstition-haunted primates, whining and grubbing about
in the ruins of a former glory they had forgotten except as glittering
myth and frightful legend.

The scientific hierarchy which had guarded the encystment vault had
altered only slightly to become a hierarchy of priesthood. And the
unwanted freaks of the Hundred Cities had become gods!

Deker stiffened. His eyes probed outward beyond the firelight where a
distorted cry had cut off the other shrieks of the celebrants. The two
high priests sank down, murmuring incantations against evil. The ragged
mob around the fires were frozen into taut outlines staring toward the
valley to the north.

"What is it now?" the hunchback murmured into Deker's ear. "What awful
world have we found, trying to escape that other one?"

Shar gripped his arm tightly. With a terrible abruptness then, from a
thousand or so straining throats, the cry was torn:

"_The Beasts!_"

Deker was on his feet, eyes fighting the glimmering vagueness of fires
and moonlight. The two-headed man moved his two puckered mouths in a
desperate effort to speak. Finally he formed halting words:

"Deker! My pain was padded with dreams before. Now there can be no more
dreaming. Deker, I must die! Kill me!"

The priests were marching away. Deker heard them exhorting the
shivering mob with hysterical boldness.

"Fight, children of Utopia. The Temple Gods of Brenn stand over us.
Slay the Beasts. Revenge! Kill!"

After a pulsing silence, Deker thought he could feel the waves of
growing courage beating round him. With it, in himself, grew an
ecstatic surging longing. Then his straining eyes saw the vague loping
forms dodging through the leaning ruins. They seemed to be half the
height of the Utopes, but long, slender, and fast. These were only
soft, delicate padding sounds as they moved in closer to the kill.

Deker turned toward the lesser gods on the platform with him. He
saw their white, desperate faces, knew they were groping, trying to
comprehend the vastness of the circumstances into which time and
the vagaries of an old man had thrown them. Some of them had made
adjustments to their own abnormalities back in their own time, had
accepted Nirvana, to escape a world that despised them. And instead of
a rewarding sleep, dreams, Lethe, they got this! There was no equipment
here to send them once more out of reality. Unless they returned to the
vault to the encystment capsules. Deker wondered.

He clenched his fists. He cursed Brenn. Yet, without Brenn, he might
have remained just another cog in an uninteresting static machine until
he was destroyed. Now, at least, he lived.

"These are our people, still," he said tensely, quickly. "Maybe no one
survives in the other cities, but these Utopes still live because we
gave them hope, and faith. We were misfits in the Federation, but we're
gods now. Do whatever you choose. I'm going to fight."

He jumped from the platform. And even as he hit the ground he felt the
hunchback beside him.

"Fool, Deker!" he heard Shar hiss. "Come back! Let's not die among
those dogs!" But Deker didn't even look at Shar.

The hunchback swung along beside him, his wide, heavy mouth stretched
in a gleaming grin. His deep-set eyes above bony cheeks shone with
bright anticipation.

"_Götterdämmerung_," he chuckled. "A short, sweet life for the
gods."

The priests were screaming commands. The tattered horde had formed into
a rough defense line. Behind it huddled a group of cowering women and
naked children with bloated stomachs. Around them stood old men with
clubs. The others, preparing to fight, held crude swords beaten from
heat-softened metal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Aside from the hunchback, four others of the "gods" had followed
Deker--the albino, the two-headed man, the little bald-headed freak
with the pallid skin, and the other oddity with a delicate airy stride
who seemed almost to have been a bird. There were bulges on each
shoulder that could have been wings. Together they edged their way
through the trembling, tightly-packed Utopes.

As Deker broke through the front line, he stopped. The hunchback drew
in his breath hoarsely, then began humming a strange wordless dirge.
The albino squealed and hid behind the hunchback.

No firelight here. A jagged mass of steely splinters jutted upward
behind the Beasts. They stood silently, only partially visible in the
purple black shadows and the splashing pools of moonlight, about fifty
feet from Deker. Then their long sleek lengths began rising upward,
growing before Deker's startled gaze. They became taller than Deker,
and their forepaws were making motions to each other! Then he heard
them talking--talking!

"The sport is over. They must all be killed now."

"Yes. They who have been awakened might make the others able to fight
us."

"Those who have awakened are different. Get them first. Kill!"

Deker shot a desperate glance to either side. For one incredulous
instant he realized the significance of what he was seeing, hearing.
These creatures still appeared more feline than human, but they
walked upright. They had a crude human speech. And their forepaws had
become--hands! Hands with long, flexing talons.

Deker flung himself to one side. He heard a rising moan of fear--fear
and something else. Tortured mental conflict. The Utopes turned. They
were routed without even a gesture of resistance. Their clubs and crude
words clanged in piles as they threw them away and scrambled back,
pawing, mouths twisting with fear. While Deker fought, dazedly as
though in a nightmare, he saw the expanse behind him suddenly barren of
all Utopes.

Only their gods remained to battle the Beasts!

Deker rolled along the partly frozen ground. His hand closed over the
rough handle of an abandoned sword. He leaped at a grinning, whiskered
face. He saw the hunchback beside him, a club in one hand, a dripping
sword in the other. The albino, of whom Deker caught darting glimpses,
was squeaking furiously, leaping about with nervous frantic speed, his
blade flashing in and out like a needling fang.

A swishing talon spun Deker's weapon from his hand. His left arm was
suddenly numb. As agony stunned his brain, he fell to his knees. Above
him was the Beast's grinning face, with brilliant probing green eyes.
He saw the talon sweeping down, retracting, coyly playing. It struck
again.

"_Götterdämmerung!_" repeated the hunchback, with a panting laugh.




                              CHAPTER IV

                           _Ruins of Death_


When the blow failed to fall, Deker shifted his eyes upward and saw
why. The two-headed man was wrapped in the Beast's arms. Blood streamed
from the Beast's throat from a wound the two-headed man's sword had put
there. Deker heard the crunching sounds as the Beast smashed the two
heads one after the other. The Beast then fell sprawling over the body
of the two-headed man, its tail twitching even after it was dead.

Deker managed to gain his feet. Five Beasts still remained to battle
the gods. The others--how many Deker didn't know--had sped off in
pursuit of the fleeing Utopes. The hunchback and the albino stood on
either side of Deker, swords ready. Two Beasts lay motionless on the
ground.

"Let's fall back deeper into the ruins," suggested Deker weakly.

The albino squealed. "Yes! They want _me_ more than anyone."

Then Deker remembered. "Where's Shar?"

He eyed the silent Beasts whose green and yellow eyes stared fixedly.
As if in answer, Deker heard a long, roaring laugh. He turned.
The Cyclops ran past with Shar thrown over his shoulder. She was
yelling, beating with impotent fists on the Cyclops' broad back. They
disappeared beneath the high mound of twisted metal.

A Beast started to spring after them.

"Back, Jharl!" another warned. "The death waits there. Back!"

Deker swayed toward the dark mass hiding the Cyclops and Shar.

"Easy," cautioned the hunchback. "We'll retreat after them, but take
your time. These Beasts aren't so tough. They hate cold steel."

"All right," agreed Deker.

They backed slowly toward the decline leading under the pile of metal.
But the Beasts seemed reluctant to follow. Nowhere could Deker see a
sign that any Utopes had remained behind near their crude shelters to
fight beside their gods. But from varied distances he did hear the
cries of the fleeing and the dying.

"We at least gave them courage," said Deker drily. "For a few thousand
years. Gave them hope anyway. We were effective gods all right--as long
as we slept."

One of the Beasts started to cut off their retreat. But again one of
the four ordered him back. Deker knew the Beasts were playing with them.

The Beasts were comparatively tireless; they could wait. Soon many
more of their kind would return from the slaughter. And unless some
unforeseeable development occurred fast, the remaining gods would soon
join the others. The two-headed man's pain was ended forever. The man
who might have had wings no longer dreamed of what he might have been.
The little pallid bald-headed man was dead. Gone from their brief,
unsought Olympus.

But what really mattered was what had happened to Shar! Mentally the
Cyclops had conditioned himself by brooding introspection and reading
to assume the attitudes his physical appearance suggested. A monstrous,
three-eyed colossus out of legend.

The nearest Beast gestured frantically. He called--a high mewling cry.

"Back, Jharl!"

Deker glanced behind him. They were at the head of the long slope
ending in the heart of the pile concealing Shar and the Cyclops. It
was then Deker noticed the slight emanating glow. A sentient cold.
Radio-activity!

"Wait," Deker said harshly. "Hold it, Red!"

The albino stopped. The Beasts had already stopped some distance away,
though one of them kept impatiently easing toward Deker, then jumping
back, trembling with frustration.

Deker knew enough about physics from his compensatory studying those
long evenings after working with his despised lathe, to know why they
might die. "The Burning Death." The priests had said it came out of the
atom-blasted ruins. For perhaps thousands of years these metals filled
with neutrons had radiated their poisons, might continue to do so for
many more.

The unstable nuclei of the metal which had captured the wandering
neutrons were still disintegrating slowly. If a living organism got
too much, the blood corpuscles would disintegrate too. The area was a
deadly pool of rays and radio-active particles. Only this heart of the
field still remained deadly after so long a time.

Deker explained while the Beasts stood off, silently waiting.

"We evidently have only two choices," he finished. "Stay here where
the Beasts are afraid to follow, and die--unpleasantly--in some
unpredictable future. Or go back out now and fight the Beasts."

Deker knew what he had to do--go into the very heart of the radiation
after Shar. He wondered why he hadn't done it before. Then the moon
went down behind a black cloudbank. After that the only light was the
soft bluish glow from the fissioning ruins.

       *       *       *       *       *

The albino's eyes were small red glares in the dark. The hunchback's
big hands closed on Deker's arm. He heard a deep laugh. Then the
strange song coming out of the dark chilled Deker, yet soothed him.

    Cold steel in the heart and final sleep;
    Cold steel and the claws of the Beast.

"No!" whined the albino. "Not me. I'll take the gamma rays--anything
but the Beasts! Stay here with me!"

Ten slitted yellow-green eyes glowed back at Deker as he stood there
waiting. Then from behind them Deker heard Shar scream. He heard the
bellowing roar of the Cyclops. Shar screamed again. After that came a
terrible silence that went on, a timeless pulsing fear. Deker pawed
the darkness. He must go after Shar. But what could he do against the
Cyclops, with his swelling helpless arm?

"How long can we stay within the radiation field without being fatally
affected?" asked the hunchback.

"I don't know," said Deker. "We can stand some without damage. We're
just within the field evidently. Shar and the Cyclops are in its heart.
However, there's no way of knowing how long after exposure the symptoms
will appear, then death."

"We should take the chance until dawn," the hunchback reasoned. "We
wouldn't have a chance against the Beasts in the dark. They can see. We
can't--except the albino. And it's quite plain that he doesn't want to
fight them anyway."

"Let's wait until dawn," begged the albino. "Wait with me."

"All right, Red," Deker agreed. "I want some kind of chance. At least I
want to see. We need some rest, too."

Deker felt of his arm. It was swelling rapidly, pain growing with the
increased size. He gripped his crude sword.

"Deker!" the albino was asking desperately. "What does it mean? These
Beasts becoming almost human?"

"Natural evolutionary processes wouldn't account for it," said Deker.
"Unless we've been in suspended animation for millions of years instead
of merely thousands. And I don't believe we have."

"Abnormal evolutionary development rate," said the hunchback with
unexpected profundity.

"Probably," agreed Deker. "The radio-activity from the hundred blasted
cities has created a freak world into which we fit no better than in
the world we left. No telling what hard radiation has done to the
normal processes we once knew. But why haven't the Utopes changed,
too? Accelerated evolutionary growth, if it's caused by the radiation,
should apply to all living organisms."

"Why bother with logic here?" sighed the hunchback. "Accept what we
find, as we find it. Logic is false; it can never be complete. The
Utopian Federation was based on mechanistic logic. It's gone."

During a pause, Deker could hear the distant cries of Beasts and
sometimes a cry that might have been human. The hunchback broke the
depressing silence with an appropriate chant:

    Gone, gone the crystalline heights
    Of Tyre and Sodom and Gomorrah.
    Alexandria and Ninevah and New York, too, are gone.
    And the Hundred Cities' dust has mingled without song.
    Ah, Deker, no man is infallible.
    No city--no city is immortal.

"You sing well," commented Deker wearily, his eyes drooping with fever
and fatigue. "When could you have learned to be a singer of verse in
the unemotional Federation?"

"You studied at nights, Deker, to take your mind from your inherent
feelings of inferiority, of not belonging. Well, I sang. In the museum
libraries, illegally of course, I read of the darkest histories of man;
for I knew that only in the past would I have ever fitted in. I never
thought I would find my world in a distant future. Yet I should have
known that dark always must follow the light. And the light the dark."

Deker started away into the heart of the radio-active field after Shar.
But the hunchback seemed to sense his movements in the dark. Powerful
arms wrapped around him, held him back.

Deker explained, and the hunchback softly called him a fool.

"She isn't worthy of you, Deker. She is too abnormal, even for you. Her
mind is more bestial than those who wait for us. She could have escaped
the Cyclops, followed us into battle. She loves the Cyclops, his brute
strength, mastery and savagery. She isn't for you, Deker."

"It's a thing I've got to do," whispered Deker. He tried to fight free.

"No, Deker. You aren't going. Listen!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Deker heard it. It was close at first, then began fading as the two
ran away together on the far side of the radio-active debris. Shar's
laughter. Not demented laughter, but sly, triumphant.

As Deker slumped down, his heart was heavy with the pain of defeat. He
stretched out unfeeling on the hard, partly frozen ground. Finally he
felt nothing at all except an infinite thickening softness. He would
sleep....

Some time later he felt hands shaking him. He opened burning eyes. The
hunchback's gargoyle face was grinning close above his, eyes gleaming
with cynical humor.

"There's no escape for us through sleep, Deker," the hunchback said.
"We tried it for a long time. We've always got to wake up to realities.
It's time now, Deker. It's dawn."

Deker rolled over, watching the serrated outline of the crumbled city
against a crimson sunrise. Then, coming on over on an elbow, he saw
the Beasts. Five of them still standing there fully erect on their
strangely bent haunches, fixed with terrible patience. The dew of the
night had settled like minute jewels over their sleek glistening fur.

"All right," said Deker, climbing painfully to his feet. His body was
stiff with cold, and chills of fever jerked uncontrollably over the
length of his throbbing body. His arm was a swollen useless lump.

"It's time, so let's go."

He gripped the sword in his good hand.

The albino screamed, but Deker didn't hear him. He didn't hear anything
as he walked forward, except the mad pounding of his own heart. But his
fevered brain was groping frantically for some last strategic effort. A
seething anger clutched him as he ran toward the Beasts. He didn't want
to die yet.

He heard himself yelling. Roaring, the hunchback was beside him. And
the Beasts moved, blurs of feral lightning energy.

Deker realized then how weak and useless he was as he stumbled, went
down. Again and again he swung the blade, shearing only cold morning
mist. Hooked talons raked down, then just short of decapitating him,
the claws flexed inward, and a sadistic slap sent him sprawling. A
Beast was straddling him, its tongue licking through gleaming fangs.

A paw gave him a playful cuff, and he rolled across the thawing ground.
Dazed, Deker saw that the hunchback had been more successful. His sword
dripped red. A Beast was twitching on the ground. The hunchback laughed
as he ran to Deker, stood over him.

The Beast that had been toying with Deker fell back, its emotionless
round face staring. It was still breathing normally in spite of the
short, intense skirmish.

"You can fight," it said. "Last night you fought, but we thought it
only an exceptional instance. You can still fight! Why is this? None of
the Utopes or the Glowing Ones fight."

Deker could detect fear. Not of any immediate danger from himself or
the hunchback or the albino, but of this mysterious ability to fight.

Deker frowned through a mist of fevered weariness. It wasn't at all
normal. Whatever else the human species had lacked they had always been
children of conflict. They thrived on barriers to achievement. But the
humans of this era had never been known to fight the Beasts.

Why?

The Utopes here were groveling in cowardice, helplessly fleeing in
constant terror of the Beasts. They had made swords, but they couldn't
use them. They had made them in anticipation of the gods awakening and
giving them courage.

But the gods had failed.

"What has happened that you humans can fight?" the Beast asked again.

So Deker bluffed. "Not us alone. All the Utopes have changed. Soon
we'll all be hunting you again. For sport. You've been good hunting for
a long time."

With snarling screams, the Beasts leaped in again. Deker reasoned this
to be his last combat. But he didn't care. Deep beneath his fear, was a
gladness for all that had happened.

How much better a way was this than even Nirvana.

He managed to get to his feet, swaying. Then the woman in the sphere
appeared. Waiting behind a column of twisted metal, she had been
watching the strange combat, watching and listening.




                               CHAPTER V

                         _Perl of the Sphere_


From behind the blackened heap, the woman came near before Deker
realized that she was there. First he saw only the shimmering sphere
moving noiselessly over the ground, then he saw the woman through the
translucent shell.

She didn't seem human, glowing with an argent brilliance through
shifting hues. Her hair was red-gold. Her tall body was soft rich
bronze covered slightly with glittering stuff. She was walking with
austere measured strides over the debris, and the coruscating globe
encircling her followed her movements faithfully like an enwrapping
splendid shadow.

Rather boredly she moved straight toward the Beasts. They sprang back
with long leaps of thirty feet. They landed crouched, tongues licking
and eyes flaming. The one that had spoken with Deker trembled down the
tawny sleekness of its body.

"A Glowing One!" it growled to its followers, then lapsed into a
slurred spitting gibberish.

Then they ran. Long, frightened bounds took them away with startling
speed, down the long slope of ruin, sent them diving headlong into the
thick sea fog of the valley.

The girl moved past the panting hunchback, toward Deker. The albino
crept up beside the hunchback, crying, his little pink hands rubbing at
his eyes.

Deker made some exclamation of awe, while the girl came as near to him
as was possible without the translucent sphere touching him. It had
about a ten-foot radius. It seemed to be a sphere within a sphere, the
outside one rotating around the other. The sphere represented great
danger--and power.

Deker backed away. The sphere followed, and the hunchback laughed. But
the girl didn't seem to notice, as she studied Deker. He felt small
again, inferior, embarrassed. He hated her a little then, with the
resentment he had felt for the exalted environment of the Federation.

The albino edged closer, leaving the hunchback. Deker waited, for what,
he didn't know. He only knew this woman was in a position to make the
first, maybe even the final, gesture.

He blinked with pain, holding his shoulder. His arm seemed ready to
burst. The woman didn't seem interested in his arm.

"There were really men sleeping in the vault then," she finally said.

The protection surrounding her had no nullifying effect on her voice
which was rich and low and coldly impersonal.

Deker nodded. Her arrogant cyanogen-blue eyes narrowed.

"You have slept in that vault a very long time, if the myth of the
Utopes is fact. Our history also speaks of you sleepers, but I hardly
believed it. You came from before the Change? That is almost too
incredible. I wouldn't believe it, except that you can fight. It is odd
to see a human with that ability--disgusting and terrible too. Tell me,
what was the date in which you were put into this--sleep?"

Deker said in a faint whisper, "Twenty-one-sixty."

Awe broke the cold mask of detachment for an instant. But her interest
was only that of an indurated scientist who had coldly drawn something
new out of a test-tube.

She started to speak, then jerked her head with a startled gesture
toward the sky. Deker followed her gaze. A cloud of flying things in
perfect formation was descending, growing larger with fearful speed. A
distant buzzing grew into a sullen roar.

"Flies!" the hunchback yelled wildly. "Flies, twice as big as a man!"

"I would advise you two to seek shelter," the girl in the sphere said
calmly. "They cannot touch me inside this composite protective field."

The formation of bee-flies was hurtling straight for Deker. His eyes
frantically sought shelter, though the beauty of the attacking giants
penetrated his fear.

The black velvet bodies into which the sunlight sank and disappeared;
the fringe of golden hairs along their bodies, the steel-gray
many-faceted eyes of which their heads were made. He saw the incredibly
delicate formation of their wings which seemed to have a spread of
almost thirty feet, so thin the light in passing through them was
refracted into rainbow tints so that the whole sky was a blaze of color.

"You probably find it rather amazing what has happened even to flies in
forty thousand years," the woman said carelessly.

But Deker was running in slow painful haste, with the hunchback and the
albino. The sky was a riotous blaze of fantastic coloration as the
bee-flies circled overhead, huge lancets below enormous compound eyes
expanding and dripping with hunger as they reached down, preparing to
draw the blood from their prey.

Deker saw the hunchback now, crawling under the debris. But a sound
had stopped Deker. Not an ordinary scream, even of terror. But a
soul-wrenching cry that sent little pockets of fear bursting inside
Deker's stomach, chilling his back.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deker turned. The albino fell. Evidently he had badly injured his foot
or ankle for he repeatedly fell. And just above him a bee-fly hovered,
its wings quivering, its lancet projecting down long and bristling, a
filamented mouth gaping at its tip.

Deker wondered why he did it. He didn't care for the albino, a queer
little helpless wretch in a perpetual funk. But in spite of the
giant bee-flies, Deker started back to help the albino. He managed
to retrieve his sword. He retched as the long lancet smacked, stuck
against the Albino's twitching back.

[Illustration: As Deker retrieved his sword, the long lancet smacked,
stuck into the albino's twitching back.]

The translucent wings beat in shimmering waves as the blood-sucking
instruments fixed inexorably on the albino. Deker threw some last bit
of burning energy into his wavering brain and tottering legs--but the
bee-fly was taking his meal with him, up into the air. Deker saw the
albino's red eyes bulging with final horror. The white face opened, and
a last tattered cry ripped out.

Leaping upward, Deker futilely swung his sword. Around him there seemed
suddenly a thousand sucking lancets. Then one moment of bursting pain.
His mind seemed to explode. There was a ripping agony as though every
atom in him were flying apart.

Then the gently swaying music. The caress of soft depthless clouds. And
no more pain. Somehow he felt that the pain could never return. It was
the last impression he remembered before the dark cloud released him
from all the others....

Deker opened his eyes. He was inside the sphere! He was lying at the
girl's small sandaled feet, and she was looking down at him with
detached interest.

"You live," she stated. "Remarkable. I didn't think you would. Though I
had to take the chance, for the bee-flies would certainly have killed
you. You must be radically different physically from the ordinary
human, or you would never have passed through the shield, even though
I did lower its rate as much as possible."

He turned on his side. The world out there was a shimmering unreality
as though viewed through watered glass. High up, the bee-flies were
winging away across the fog-bound valley. The hunchback was out there
staring, sword poised.

He reached out with the blade.

"No!" Deker heard the girl exclaim. "Don't touch the shield. You would
die!"

"I'm just as inhuman as he is." The hunchback grinned. "But you're the
boss right now, lady. You, Deker--you all right?"

Deker tried to speak, failed.

"He is very ill," the girl said. Her voice held no compassion. "I'm
taking him with me to my sanctum."

"And where is your--sanctum?"

"Not so far from here. I will go slowly so that if you are his--friend,
is that the word?--then you may follow us."

"Why are you taking Deker with you?"

"Is that his name? Odd--Deker. Anyway I'm taking him because of a
certain curiosity. I've often wondered about the ancient Utopes who
were said to be sleeping in the vault. I will cure him of his wound
by ray treatment. I would learn more of his ability to fight. In our
world, only Beasts can do that."

There it was again, mused Deker, half asleep. The outsiders, the freaks.

Again reality faded for him, and he dreamed. How easy it was anymore
for him to return to sleep as an escape from reality. Well, his body
had certainly been conditioned to it long enough. But it was a weakness
now. He slept too easily.

Peculiar woman, his fading thoughts decided. Unpleasantly arrogant
and emotionless and egotistical, but so pleasantly beautiful and
desirable. And she was controlling nuclear forces in a world shattered
to barbarism by the atom, reduced to another dark age of half human
horrors, accelerated evolution, monsters, in which the only other
humans he had seen were little more than crawling apes.

But he slept....

He felt much better after he awoke, ate, drank some bitter-sweet juice,
and found that his arm had almost healed. He had slept for five days.

Her sanctum was a high naked tower of metal four miles from the remains
of City Three. It was built on the side of a heavily forested slope
at the foot of mist-softened mountains, beside a clear cold stream.
And her sanctum had never been intended for anyone else but her. It's
interior was a simple, utilitarianly designed cylindrical shell. Its
walls were the same as the sphere in which she traveled, a composite
force shield against any interference in her individual pathway of
existence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gans, the hunchback, sat outside in the warm noonday sun, singing
beside the mountain water. Deker, sprawled out on pneumatic cushions
beneath the window from which he could see distant peaks and past which
an occasional winged monster broodingly flapped. He listened to the
hunchback's resigned, introspective, and rather sad song:

    Never shall I strain my dull eyes more
    For hidden meaning; I shall be as one
    Who in his dim perception of the skies
    Sees but the certain glory of the sun
    And does not care to question or devise
    An answer to his own oblivion.

The girl stood looking out the window. Her body, now free of the
protective shield, was bronzed, and almost too beautiful in the
sunlight which was strangely bright in her red-gold hair. Her name was
Perl. She had no other name. She was an Anarch.

[Illustration: The girl stood looking out of the window of her sanctum.]

Deker wondered how these philosophies could endure through eons of wars
and even beyond the final war of all. A simple little philosophy that
could be traced back, according to Perl, to a time-lost philosopher
called Zeno the Stoic, the first Anarch.

Perl turned, eyes shining with fanatical self-conviction, withdrawn
into her lonely self-sufficiency. She repeated the code of the Anarchs:

    Every man is his own government, his own law, his own church, a
    system within himself.

"It has never died, our philosophy," she said. "It has reechoed through
the ages. And there was never a greater need for it than during the
reign of the Utopes who had submerged the individual completely to the
mechanistic dictates of government."

"Your Anarch ancestors launched the lightning gods that finished
civilization?" asked Deker.

She shook her head. "The Utopes. They cannot admit that their own
faulty system destroyed itself, so they blame the Anarchs. But the
Federation was undermined by its own weak base, by erratic though very
human madness that is inevitable in a social order."

Yes. No one had suspected Brenn of being anything other than a
scientist devoted to the Federation. So there had been others.

"The Fascios built an underground scientific hierarchy," Perl
explained. "They devised weapons of terrible destructiveness. They
had no reason--they were human, victims of socialization. They wanted
power. They launched their attack and, a few hours later, all the
Hundred Cities were destroyed."

Beneath her cold exterior she was quivering with a growing fear, a
terrible fear that Deker could feel only as vague tendrils clawing on
his consciousness. From behind her eyes deep stark shadows shone. And
Deker knew a racial memory persisted in this girl's mind of madness
beyond comprehension.

"Maybe only a few Utopes remain in the world now," she said. "And
they have been dying rapidly. They have learned too much to fight for
survival. So they must die, and that is best."




                              CHAPTER VI

                        "_Humanity Is Doomed!_"


Interest grew in Deker as he listened to Perl talk. He asked her
about the Anarchs who had survived the destruction, retaining a high
scientific culture.

"Ours isn't a society," she said with sudden vehemence. "Society is
evil. We have reached the final logical stage of man. This is ultimate
individualism. The highest and only sane law is that of individual
expression. Compulsion, for whatever purpose, serves only to corrupt
otherwise normal individual activities."

"But man is naturally social," said Deker. "He's always been. He
managed to survive because he cooperated. The trouble with the Utopian
Federation is simply that it became too standardized."

Perl solemnly shook her head. "Perhaps that was true, in the beginning.
But being cooperative was only a step upward in the evolutionary
scale. We have evolved beyond that stage. We have found individual
perfectionism, absolute anarchism. Any social group demands leaders;
that means power in individuals over the others which in its very
nature is a pernicious influence. Those who rule are bound, even
against their best intentions, to become self-seeking, unmindful of
those whom they represent." There was an exalted pause, then she added,
"We have reached perfection. The individual is his own god!"

Deker thought of the ironic twist. He had escaped one system of
final and static socialism into one of equally static and suicidal
individualism.

"How many of you Anarchs survived the Atom War?" he asked.

"Not many. We were far underground where we built our laboratories.
We knew that the rest of the socialistic Hundred Cities would be
annihilated. And when the--the awful destruction came, we survived.
Everything about our individual order has remained exactly the same. We
have the dominant intelligence."

"To dominate over what?" asked Deker.

"Ourselves, whom we have learned to control and guide completely. Free
from any social restriction, any communal government or organization,
man is in his perfect state." Her expression changed. Her line of
thought had altered. "You actually lived before the Change?" she said.
"What were you in that other terrible time?"

Deker smiled wryly. "I was a freak there, as I am here. I hated that
world as much as your Anarch ancestors did--maybe more. Standardization
killed individual freedom. But this Anarch system of yours, by
following an entirely divergent path, has reached the same gray end of
stagnation and futility."

She didn't comment. He went on, told her all about the encystment vault.

"But how have you preserved, intact, the culture with which you
started?" he asked then. "How has your race survived if the individual
is so--er--inviolate?"

"I've said there is--procreation. A form of marriage." She revealed
emotion for the first time, a brief blush. She turned away, again
looking out the window as she talked. "Each composite protective
shield, both of the sanctums and the spheres, is attuned to the
individual vibratory pattern. Sometime during our lives we may find
another Anarch whose vibratory pattern is similar. If that should
happen we consider such vibratory rapport all that is necessary for
mating. If such a meeting occurs we must mate. It is our only law,
and that is strictly for survival of the species. We terminate the
association as quickly as possible."

Deker smiled openly. "You're not even fooling yourself, Perl. You say
no one except one suitable for mating with you can penetrate your
composite shield. I did. You say it's because I'm physically not human.
Why not admit that my vibratory pattern is almost identical with yours?
That is why I was able to penetrate your commuting shield and the walls
of your sanctum."

Perl's reaction was violent. Her face flushed a deep red, then paled.

"You!" she said, with dripping acidity.

It hurt, the way she said it.

"Physically, that's the only explanation," he said. "We're for each
other, Perl, according to your own implacable laws, whether you like it
or not."

"It's ridiculous. As soon as your arm is completely healed you can
leave. In fact, your arm is well enough now. Good-by! Go back and marry
one of your bestial Utopes!"

"If there are any left," said Deker harshly. "The Beasts were pursuing
them. It seems as though the Beasts have let the Utopes live for
sporting purposes. Now, since we awoke, they're out to kill every
remaining Utope for fear they'll develop the ability to fight. And
there's nothing we can do." Deker was on his feet now, standing close
to her, looking straight into her eyes. "Unless you help us, Perl!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She trembled with repugnance and horror.

"You are primitive and brutal indeed. You actually would destroy?"

"For survival, Perl! You have the knowledge, the power the Beasts
don't have--yet. Use it now before the Beasts overtake and surpass you
scientifically. You've got to help or humanity's finished. You think
you can survive in your individual egoistic shell, but you're dying the
same as the Utopes. Man can't live isolated. I found that out one time.
You can't survive. You need the associative processes of society to
develop. You said yourself that nothing about your culture has changed
in thousands of years.

"Listen, Perl! Help me fight the Beasts! Help me organize the Utopes,
make them sane again so they can fight to survive. We can begin a new
civilization over the old ruins, start the long trail back up. The
human race is almost gone. Unless we organize a social group, start
soon on the road back--unless we do, we'll die here. The Beasts will
rule!"

Perl fell back. A huge black form passed across the window. Deker
caught a quick glance of a gigantic beak. It was a bird much larger
than the body of a man.

"It was the Atom War," she said softly. Her lips quivered, her eyes
smoldered with that rising fear tide. "It's a racial memory which no
human can lose from his mind. Man's socialized aggressiveness led to
that war, his inherent desire to evolve. He's lost that now, because
he had to. To preserve sanity he adopted an attitude of nonchange, the
only logical attitude. The horrors of the war into which his desire to
progress led him changed his entire psychology. Those of us who are
Anarchs, and even the Utopes, can worship only immediacy. There is a
fear blockage against all change."

"But the Utopes still have the spark," said Deker. "They want to fight,
progress. They summoned us as gods to help them."

"But they're social minded," she said. "That isn't the right road. This
is the only logical state, this individual perfectionism. Progressive
evolution, as you call it, led only to mass self-annihilation, and
things even worse." Her voice broke, shivered like shattered glass.
"Billions slaughtered--blood--rivers and oceans of it!"

Her voice sank to a low moan. Her hands shook as Deker looked at them.
She swayed. He was quickly at her side. For an instant she accepted him
there, and he felt her warm young softness. Then she indignantly pushed
him away. Frantically, desperately, Deker argued:

"Your introspective life can't last. Change is a natural law. Without
it, an organism atrophies and dies. If you can't see that, then you're
truly lost. Your generation might survive; maybe even the next, or the
next. But humanity is doomed, unless you use the power you have and
fight. Fight, Perl! Fight like a beast in the jungle!"

He turned from her, a gasping girl, wild-eyed with shock. He looked
out. The hunchback still lolled lazily by the stream, singing, eyes
closed. His brown fur robe was thrown back, and his twisted massive
body drank in the sun like a thirsty plain.

Sensing Deker above him, he opened his eyes. They crinkled in a laugh.

"It's time we were leaving, Deker. There's nothing here for us. We're
alone here, even more than the other time."

Deker wordlessly turned from Gans the Hunchback.

"You haven't decided yet to use your knowledge of power, and work
with us and with the Utopes against the Beasts," he said to Perl. A
pause, and he added, "Then you will never decide. It's your burden,
your conscience--the death of the human species. It's terribly wrong,
because it's possible that man deserves another chance."

Deker thought that she wanted to cry, but couldn't.

"The rapidly evolving Beasts are overtaking you rapidly," he went on.
"And even in your own isolated Anarch shells, they will eventually find
and destroy you!"

A faint cry shivered from her. She staggered, sank down on a couch.

"Get out!" she cried in tortured shuddering anguish. "Get out!"

Never having had the opportunity to understand women, Deker walked to
the wall.

"Very well. But somewhere in this twisted, defeated world we'll find
humans who are really human, who will fight with us against the Beasts."

From far away he heard her trembling voice.

"There are no such people any more. I know. Even the Utopes have
developed too far for that."

       *       *       *       *       *

Her hand moved with trembling slowness. A section of the wall
dissolved. Deker walked out into the sunshine. The hunchback rose
lazily and they walked down toward the wide plain leading from the
foothills toward a river flanked by willows.

Deker saw her shining red-gold hair framed by the window of her ivory
tower. He waved, tried to bury the ache in his heart. She didn't wave
back, but stood immobile in the window's frame. The hunchback laughed
briefly, then bitterly sang:

    She is lonely enough, dissatisfied and cold.
    There is no crowd to take her to its mocking din,
    Infold her in its grasp; tighten its faulty hold.
    There she kneels, secluded and apart,
    To worship, in the chapel of her heart.

Deker stared with new awe at the hunchback as they walked on through
the pungent-smelling thickness of the lengthening grass. A wandering
minstrel of time.

"Life has little meaning for you now, Gans?" he asked.

"Maybe it has none," said the hunchback. "We'll see what happens, where
this adventure leads us. Until then:

    The sand, the sun, the sea,
    The moon a gentle gleam.
    A memory. The fragment of a dream."

Turning, Deker could still see the shining of her red-gold hair through
the window's frame.

"She is like Semele," said the hunchback.

"Who was Semele?"

"She was the daughter of Cadmus and mother of Dionysius. Zeus having
promised her whatsoever she should ask, she begged to behold him in his
splendor, and was destroyed by his lightnings."




                              CHAPTER VII

                               _Defeat_


Now it was sunset, and the valley was again fog-bound. As Deker and
the hunchback approached the ruined city, he could hear the roars
of the animals grazing madly on the plains, animals Deker had grown
too familiar with during the months he and Gans had wandered over an
insane, distorted continent.

They had managed to survive mainly and precariously by constant flight
and desperate concealment. They had seen other Anarchs, each with his
or her ivory tower and force shields. But wherever they had gone and
whomever or whatever they had seen, the story was the same: No human
being was free from the psychic fear blockage against any kind of
evolutionary change.

In contrast to this disease of unchange, they had seen the ferocious,
terribly accelerated trail of the Beasts streaking with frightening
speed ahead along their roadway of evolution. And none of the humans
cared. They had rationalized their position. They cared nothing about
the continued survival of their species.

Their own immediate generation, particularly their own individual egos,
was all that mattered. For their sanity, they would pay the rather
exorbitant price of racial extinction.

The two gaunt, leanly muscled wanderers trudged over a low hill and
down toward the massive plain of wrenched and molten steel. Small
cooking fires sent up straight streamers of smoke through breathless
air. A few dark figures scurried like nervous animals among the ruins.

"A few Utopes still live," commented the hunchback. "They can never
leave the city of their fathers, the place where their gods once gave
them hope."

As they walked in among the cooking fires, the tattered scrawny things
that had been human, stared, cried out in confused fear, and streaked
into their holes.

But Deker headed straight for the encystment vault. And as much as he
had hated that world of the past, some part of it was far better than
this futile aberrated world poisoned by radiation and by human defeat.

As Deker and the hunchback approached the jagged opening leading into
the tunneled entrance to the vault, a towering figure stepped out,
regally clothed in white furred robes and glittering metal bracelets.

"The Cyclops," muttered the hunchback. "He still lives. But he's sick,
very sick."

His middle eye was blacker now, deeply hollowed and fiery. Shar
appeared from behind the Cyclops. She clung to him for support.

The shine was gone from her black hair which clung down in a scalp mop.
A yellow beast-skin hung loosely over a skeletal form that was barely
skin and bone. Red stones whirled, glistening futilely from her ears.
Deep down inside a dirty white face, her feverish black eyes blazed out
at Deker. Talons gripped the Cyclops' wasting arm.

"The radiation," said Deker. "I thought you had gone too far into it."

"We didn't know," rasped the Cyclops painfully. "We've found out. It
hit us only recently."

"You're still faithful to the Utopes," said Deker softly. "You're their
god."

"That's right," said the Cyclops. "And I'm remaining so."

"While you live, you're a god," said the hunchback as he sat down
lazily on a porous, time-eaten chunk of metal.

While the Hunchback sat there with his eyes partly closed, Deker told
the Cyclops and his mate everything he had discovered about the world
of the Anarchs, the accelerated evolutionary development of the Beasts
who were overtaking and would surpass man. The sickening death's head
skull of the Cyclops nodded.

"I know. I've tried to drive them against the Beasts. But they run
until they drop, or hide. I've organized defense methods. We have
signals, and stand watches so we can hide before the Beasts can
surprise us. I've had them store up food, too, so they can stay in
hiding for long periods. That's all I could do." He coughed.

"You've been a good god," commented Deker.

The Cyclops shook off Shar's emaciated arm, tottered forward. There was
a horrible impression of great strength despite his wasted body. His
right hand came from behind him grasping a heavy double-hilted sword.

"And I'm going to remain their ruler." He repeated it with growing
ferocity, his middle eye glaring.

"Why worry about it if you'll soon die?" asked the hunchback.

"I'll die a god!" said the Cyclops dramatically. "As I've lived."

"Wait!" began Deker, but already the skeletal figure of the Cyclops was
shambling forward, swinging the polished blade.

Deker managed a crude parry and dodged away. Then the Cyclops fell,
fell gasping, battering in slowing desperation with fleshless arms.
Deker dragged him off, while the awful outline of Shar fell on him
like a thing from a grave, clawing frantically. Deker flung her away.
She began to die there. The Cyclops crawled to her, crying with a dark
bestial loneliness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deker was sick as he watched. They had clung precariously to life, but
this sudden abnormal effort was ending it. They had got a tremendous
dose of gamma rays and neutrons. Intestinal tracts had gradually broken
down, and their bodies had been unable to manufacture enough white
blood corpuscles.

It took Shar a long time to die, and before she was dead, the Cyclops
joined her as though he wanted to. They both went into a coma and died
together, an hour later.

"Well, they died as gods," said the hunchback, "and that's what they
wanted. One by one they've all found what they wanted, except us,
Deker."

They stood in the entrance to the vault, and this time the hunchback
had no song to sing.

Deker led the way without any further conversation into the tunnel.
They stood in the dim luciferin glow of the cold light that could burn
on for centuries more.

"Are you sure you don't mind staying here, Gans?"

"Are you sure you want to return to Nirvana, Deker?"

"I'm sure. My original purpose--and yours--in choosing Nirvana was to
escape an intolerable world. I awoke too soon, or too late. It doesn't
matter now. I want to go back to sleep."

"And I want to remain here," said the hunchback. "I seek no further for
the chimera. One can search forever through the winding labyrinth and
somewhere at the end of the quest, the minotaur always waits. I've had
enough."

"You're bitter," said Deker. "You'll be lonely. And I'm afraid all your
songs will be sad."

"My life will be short in such a world as this," declared the
hunchback. "But I no longer care about escaping. There's no place to
go. Who knows what conditions you will awaken to? Besides, one of
us must remain behind. One must administer to the other until the
encystment process is activated again."

"All right," said Deker with a conclusion arrived at several times
before.

"Anyway," the hunchback added, "now that the Cyclops is gone, what few
Utopes remain alive need a god. I don't think it quite fair that all
their gods should abandon them."

They studied the records Brenn had left. All the necessary information
was there. For Deker, who had studied and become so thoroughly educated
in basic principles, it was fairly simple.

So again Deker was inside the capsule, suspended from the low ceiling
of the vault like a pendulum so that even the Earth's movement would
not disturb his sleep. All sensory stimuli were shut out, permitting
the vasomotor centers complete freedom from disturbance in the
hermetically sealed capsule. Again the temperature would lower to the
7.1 level and another stage of Nirvana would begin. And end--except
that Nirvana should have no ending.

He closed his eyes. It was much easier for him now. For almost
immediately, from long conditioning, his mind, his entire nervous
system responded, and he began slipping away, deep deep down into that
gloriously soft dream-sea. He heard the metronomes working again, far
away--and fading, fading, the last soft chanting of the hunchback,
Gans, as he sang above him, or somewhere through the falling curtain of
mist:

    I shall not go far, Deker.
    I have my story and my laugh.
    And always something happens, someone comes.
    Long solitude will make the bargain fair;
    The exchange even. I need but wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was easier this time for Deker to awake. The mechanism was so
arranged that one comparatively simple threshold was left at normal
waking level. When this one threshold level was activated by the
metronome, it started a chain reaction, as the temperature gradually
returned to normal, to an activation of all his bodily faculties.

This time there was little stiffness or pain. This--time?

Opening his eyes, he looked straight up through the transparent plastic
cowling of the encystment capsule. He waited a long time before he
moved any other part of his body, thinking. He made one resolve then,
that he knew he would keep. He would never go into the sleep again. No
matter what happened, he knew he was finished with Nirvana.

Because for some reason, the thought of returning again and again to
Nirvana was frightening. It was too abnormal, in a temporal sense,
too vast in its possible implications. He might continue with this
process forever, if that word held any meaning for him. Go on and on,
beyond the race, beyond all life, find himself in some deserted sunset
where there was nothing left--only dust and mute evidence of a final
destruction, nothing save dust and a hot dry wind.

But as Deker looked out through the vault--everything else had changed!

Deker shivered as he pressed the button at his side. The cowling slid
back. He was outside the capsule, looking across the small enclosure of
the vault. Outside was incredible alteration. The protective mountain
of sheeting, lead and plasticrete and steel had been removed. Parts
of the steel walls of the vault had been replaced with translucent
paneling.

Beyond, Deker could see towering walls and long gently winding halls
that gave off a soothing pattern of shifting harmonic lights. Narrow
columns rose from vari-colored pastel flooring, blossoming outward and
up like monstrous flowers.

Men and women, a small group, were walking toward him down the hall.
They were more or less grand, Deker decided, in brilliantly colored
sandals and brief shorts--tall, willowy golden men and women with the
carriage of kings and queens. They were gesticulating with a dignified
excitement.

They came to the vision panels and stood looking in at him.

Deker's eyes fell down, saw his ragged fur skin hanging to his bony
frame, saw the scarred flesh, the ragged, dirty nails curling on the
ends of his hands. He glanced up again at his audience who were staring
back with increasing curiosity, but with a high austere curiousness as
though Deker were some sort of animal in an ostentatious zoo.

Animal--in a zoo!

A terrible familiar sickness hit him. There was a difference, but also
an almost terrifying similarity with that other time, now how long ago?
Perhaps he could never determine. Was there never, never to be an
escape?

He shrugged off the growing sick fear. It was a selfish attitude to
take in the face of the magnificent fact that man had survived!

Deker meant to find out how, and the finding would be worth all the
terror and frustration. From those futile Anarchs in their egoistic
shells, and from the groveling Utopes, these super-beings had developed.

A feeling of tremendous pride in his species pulsed through him as he
stood there, an object of their polite disapprobation. His species were
indefatigable, eternal. Their survival value was infinite, regardless
of what sloughs of auto-delusion and fantasy they allowed to entrap
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

A translucent panel slid back, and the two men stepped inside and
approached him cautiously. How familiar their perfect masklike faces
were, thought Deker, with that old returning bitterness. How lacking in
individuality.

"We greet you, Sleeper," said one of them, uncomfortably it seemed,
as though condescending toward some level he couldn't understand.
"You--you may come with us."

Deker was fighting against that encroaching humility, that smothering
sensation of inferiority, of not belonging.

"Is that an order, or a statement?" he said with exaggerated defiance.

The language the men spoke was strangely distorted, but Deker
understood it in general. He had no difficulty there, and neither did
they.

The man stammered an answer, looked slightly frightened.

"What--why, it's a request naturally. There is no coercion here."

"Of course not." Deker grinned sardonically. "Anyway, not so you would
notice it. However, I would like to change into some other clothes,
get something to--some nourishment. It will seem strange to feel human
again."

Had he ever?

The tension sagged somewhat. Deker followed them through the staring
crowd outside. He noticed how the women drew back from him with obvious
distaste and antipathy they could not conceal. There was pity, too; and
that was worse.

It was too infernally familiar!

For an instant, a terrible instant, Deker thought all the eons of
frustration were converging in his eyes, that he was going to cry.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                          _The City of Perl_


Brought into a room, Deker saw that it was queerly patterned, flooded
with shifting hues of monochromatic lights. It was large, with a few
couches, and a table supported by a single blossoming column from the
ceiling. The two men motioned toward a couch and Deker sat down.

A small square in the wall slid to one side and a tray projected
itself. There was a glass on it full of colorless liquid. One of the
men motioned toward it with forced politeness.

"Drink, Sleeper. It will restore your strength."

"Not that you particularly care," thought Deker as he nodded and drank.

Immediately he felt strong, and the highly emotional feeling of
desperate futility eased somewhat.

"This is an odd situation, socially," the man who had invited him to
drink then said. "I hardly know how to approach you."

"Not as a human being," thought Deker. "Anything but that."

"You are so alien, you know," the man said, and Deker winced. "We're
almost as shocked as you are. You have been something of a shrine
since long before our objectively recorded history began. You have
been a subject of much conjecture. Not even a High Scientist has been
permitted to enter your vault. Your exact status and purpose has also
been only conjecture.

"Frankly, we hardly expected you ever to awaken. Few even thought you
were living, in the physico-chemical sense. This must be a great shock
to you. Adjusting yourself to our highly advanced perfectly socialized
culture will undoubtedly be difficult for you. We will, of course, help
you all we can." He sounded dubious.

Deker said something vague; he didn't remember what. Then a man brought
in some shorts and sandals, and Deker put them on. They were weightless
and astonishingly thin, clinging to his flesh with an uncanny
persistence.

The man who came bustling in then was obviously a man of real
importance. He appeared older than anyone Deker had seen so far,
though there were no outward physical signs of age. It was the light
behind his eyes that was old. Somehow, he suggested Jak, of City Three,
or perhaps it was only Deker's imagination.

"I'm Kahl, Mental Adjustment Specialist for World City," he said.
"You'll need me soon enough, so let us begin readjustment proceedings
right now, shall we? Of course you'll want to be reconditioned?"

He nodded to the two other men. They left.

Ominous despair thickened about Deker.

"Mental adjustment--reconditioning?" he heard himself murmuring.

He was sick. He was mad. He wanted to run far away, but there was no
place to go.

"Naturally. This is my study. My laboratories adjoin. You see, everyone
in the City of Perl has his assigned duties to the city for which he is
conditioned from his period of artificial semenation upward. Of course
I don't know what your--er--scientific background is now. But you'll
soon learn the rudiments of our glorious state."

Deker was staring. A wave of dizzy dampness swirled through the
inchoate confusion of his mind. A queer crying tightness filled his
throat.

"What? What did you say? The City of Perl!"

"Why yes. I suppose you would be more interested in our myths than our
present day realities. The name, City of Perl, stems from the legendary
beginning of our socialistic state. An odd myth, purely animistic of
course. Incredibly enough, our species were savages in those days--gods
and goddesses were born. Men saw many activities they could not
emulate, they beheld the fall of the thunderbolt, the violence of the
winds, the agitation of the waves. They imagined beings more powerful
than themselves, capable of producing these great effects."

Deker listened, a chilling wind in his brain, a growing sense of
magnificent irony and defeat in his feverish blood.

"There are legends from our beginning of two-headed gods and Cyclopean
monsters--you know, with three eyes--and legends of animals that were
like men and men who were like animals. And the myth of course includes
a goddess, a race mother so to speak, called Perl. According to this
quaint flowery legend, this Perl goddess brought great powers from the
sun and destroyed the animals and bestowed her gifts on the savages
who later formed our glorious city. Until the last five-thousand-year
plan, our ancestors considered this Perl our race mother, in a
sense, not too literally, of course. Interesting, but depressingly
emotional and infantile, isn't it? But to get back to our program of
reconditioning. You--"

       *       *       *       *       *

But Deker wasn't listening now. He was thinking deeply while his heart
cried out with regret, and his mind reeled with dim-remembered pain. If
only he had waited with the hunchback! Perl the Anarch had listened to
him, and had acted for humanity after all. Moved by his urging, she had
returned to the ruins of City Three sometime after he had gone back to
Nirvana. She had given those fear-haunted aborigines her power, and in
time had overcome their psychic blockage against aggressive action so
that they had been able to conquer the Beasts. But he could never know
exactly what had happened in that fantastically distorted time eons
before.

Deker wanted to cry out his frustration, the growing madness of this
futile escape. But there was no turning back for him now. He asked how
long he had been in the encystment capsule.

Kahl shook his head. "Your past has been repeatedly theorized upon
for at least ten thousand years. You have emerged as part of that
pre-objective barbaric myth pattern along with Perl, the race mother,
and the others. Your origin is a mystery. There is no definite
computation possible of the length of your--er--sleep."

"What city is this?" asked Deker.

"There is only one city. World City we prefer to call it rather than
the City of Perl. One tremendous city. A perfect architectural symbol
of man's omnipotence. We have found ruins of other cities scattered
over the earth, a very inferior pre-dawn age culture, of course. At
one time a former stage of pseudo-civilized humanity heavily populated
the earth, living in many cities. The perfect cooperative socialized
pattern and standardization of effort such as we have must have been
impossible under those conditions."

"Yes," whispered Deker wearily. "It was indeed. But I can tell you
this. Perl--she was no myth. She lived. It was--" He couldn't continue.

Explaining his origin, and his knowledge of dusty pasts was futile.
Later he tried to explain again, several times, but he was part
of irrational myth and legend. He told them about the Beasts and
their accelerated evolutionary processes that were overtaking and
surpassing man; of the Anarchs who had found the ultimate perfection of
individualism, of how, even then, he had slept for 40,000 years.

He told them of that astonishingly older world order of the Hundred
Cities Utopian Federation that had also been cooperative standardized
perfection like World City, and of the Atom War that had destroyed that
other "perfect" socialized civilization. He explained his ideas about
the reality of the Perl Mother and of how she had destroyed the Beasts
and returned the race to the pathway of progressive change.

He tried to make them understand the terrifying trap of the repetitive
cycle of futility into which he had fallen. But it was impossible to
convince them. There could never have been a civilization like theirs
before, or it could not have perished.

World City had reached a state of mechanistic cooperative statism that
made the Hundred Cities Federation seem like a form of anarchy. The
inhabitants couldn't conceive of there ever having been any similar
society, especially one that had destroyed itself. For how could
socialized perfection reach such an illogical destructive end?

"Yes," Kahl was explaining to Deker a week later as Deker reported
for his five hours of reconditioning, his suggestivity shots, his new
integration checkup. "World City is probably man's ultimate and perfect
system for survival."

"Yes, I know," said Deker. "You have reached it. Again!"

Deker was laughing inwardly. He remembered how the hunchback had
laughed, and he imagined if he laughed aloud he would sound that way.

"These psycho-grams show a dubious possibility for your adjustment into
our society," said Kahl.

He leaned over his desk, a tubular glass construction with row on row
of info-screens connected with every library and branch director in
World City.

"You understand that we sympathize with you, Deker," he said. "But you
must also understand that there can be no such thing as 'individual'
consideration, divorced from the broader and primary consideration of
World City. At first I thought we might possibly recondition your mind
so that eventually you might be able to most satisfactorily serve
the city and, indirectly, yourself. But you rejected that possibility
because of your peculiarly primitive individualistic attitudes."

"That's true," said Deker, with a slow dry agony. "This time, I'm
staying just as I am."

       *       *       *       *       *

Deker had decided on his second day in the City of Perl what he was
going to do. Now he had had two weeks to study and plan; two weeks of
maddening loneliness in another pseudo-perfectionistic socialistic
culture in which he had no place. He moved now, carried out the first
step of his violent repetitive plan. He had tried this once before and
though it hadn't worked out, he would try it again. He hit Kahl on the
point of the jaw.

It was not a forceful blow, but Kahl crumbled without a sound across
his desk.

Deker had determined once more to try living alone....

He went out through the dissolving wall, entered an elevator. He
emerged finally onto a narrow ramp to which two atomurbinic aircraft
were held by magnetic grapples. He jumped into one, conscious of the
over-powering sense of inadequacy and nervous defeatism.

High above the endlessly stretching chrome-plated grandeur of the most
colossal city the world had ever seen, he felt dwarfed into individual
insignificance. He didn't like that feeling. He hated the city with a
suffocating hate as he sent the atomurbinic machine streaking through
the clear cold air high above the city.

Deker understood the principle upon which the aircraft operated. He
intended to fly it to some desolate area in the North and try again to
isolate himself, again live fully his eternal rôle as the pariah.

The turbine, almost as old as history itself, had been combined
with atomic power to produce the only practical approach to an
atomic-powered skycraft. The turbine, geared down considerably, turned
a small propellor; and the exhaust gas from the turbine, although not
essential for flight, gave an added boost to that supplied by the
propellor. The critical size for the self-explosion of U-235 was much
too large for small vehicles.

Once settled in a well-hidden spot, Deker intended to use the machine
to set up a small efficient living unit with plenty of heat and power.
That would be a good beginning for his fight to survive in the
Northern wilderness.

Deker hadn't really expected to escape. But his flight ended much
sooner than he anticipated. They cheated him out of even a brief thrill
of flight.

An invisible magno-beam clamped on his plane. Electronic automatic
radasoles severed the power circuit. He was held suddenly motionless
and impotent in the air above the seemingly limitless expanse of World
City. Other planes rose, took him down again and directly back to the
Mental Readjustment Specialist, Kahl, who was waiting for him in stolid
silence.

Five men stood behind Kahl for protection now. Three others held Deker,
regarding him as little better than a mad savage.

"I knew you would rebel in some fashion," said Kahl sorrowfully. "It
was evident on your thought tracings. But I was hardly prepared for
such--such atavism, such barbaric methods. However, this quality of
yours makes it much easier for me to conclude our conversation, which
was so rudely interrupted."

Deker hardly listened. The gray cloud of defeat had thickened,
dulling all sound and sight. He slumped there in stunned passive
disillusionment and blighted hope. He heard distantly:

"We have considered returning you to this suspended animation from
which you recently awoke. But that, according to our implacably just
laws, demands your personal permission, and you have refused us that."

"Yes," mumbled Deker.

"So, Deker, there is only one alternative, one I have hitherto
failed to mention because it was not certain then what your basic
psychological characteristics were. Now I know. Now I'm sure the Ship
is the only answer."

Deker said wearily. "What is this alternative?"

"This should appeal to your newly evidenced atavism," said Kahl. "Our
glorious order has perfected--space travel!"




                              CHAPTER IX

                            _Final Escape_


Hearing what Kahl said, Deker began to laugh. He laughed until a wave
of weakness stopped the laughter in a choking cry. He felt different
after that. The face of Kahl was clearer, as was his voice.

"The research was started long ago, Deker," Kahl was explaining. "But
according to our Council Judiciary Code, unless scientific discoveries
or inventions are known to contribute directly to the progress of the
city, they are not exploited. It is obvious that it would be a waste of
city energy and time to develop interplanetary travel unless it could
be shown to be of some benefit to the city. So far, no such benefit
had been apparent until the concept of space flight was applied to the
problem of our Unstables.

"Other than for that reason, space flight may never be necessary for
World City. Our birth rate is perfectly regulated, you know. The
population will remain at a chosen balanced level. Because everyone
is perfectly satisfied, there is no pioneering spirit or desire to
colonize--those being symptomatic of psychological maladjustment--as in
your case.

"However,"--Kahl coughed delicately--"half a century ago a rather
strange discovery was made in psycho-surgery. It was found that certain
types of recalcitrants or abnormals suffered from inherent incurable
anti-social attitudes. These exceptional cases are negativistic to our
conditioning programs. We call these rare but somewhat persistent types
Unstables."

"They've always had some sort of label," said Deker. "Imperfections
within the perfect."

Yes, in a broad, terribly ironic sense, history did repeat itself--for
him. But this certainly might be an unexpected way out. Space travel.
He had come a long time to find it. Space travel. Something about the
phrase lifted him, transported him celestially into some far height of
elation.

Kahl had ignored his remark. "These Unstables appear now and then
despite our most exhausting efforts to the contrary. They are
erratically intelligent, capable in their own unique ways. But they
are totally unsuited to our socialistic standardized system. Being
unhappy, maladjusted themselves, this space travel as an escape method
has appealed strongly to all our Unstables. They have been more than
willing to volunteer as crew members to man the first known space ship
from Earth."

"I can understand their reaction," said Deker.

"The first experimental flight is theoretically destined for the planet
Venus. You--have some acquaintanceship with astronomy, Deker?"

"Vaguely," said Deker wryly.

"The Council has established a Solar Colonization Bureau which includes
scientists who have been especially conditioned for this particular
specialization. Well, Deker, are you interested?"

"I am," said Deker hoarsely. "You may never know how very interested."

"Of course there will be no returning," said Kahl. "That's part of the
plan."

"That, too, is most agreeable to me," said Deker.

"Take him to the Unstable Wards," Kahl said to the men who were still
holding Deker. "During the next few weeks he will undergo basic
training under Morlo's supervision, and will get acquainted with his
fellow crew members. I believe Deker will make Morlo a full crew."
Kahl turned to Deker. "Good luck to you. You may feel proud that, in
spite of your unfortunate background, your mysterious and unavoidable
alienage, you have found a magnanimous and unforgettable place in the
selfless history of our World City."

Deker was taken to the Unstable Wards....

A reality Deker had never before known came in a burst of quickening,
pulsing lust for life there in the Unstable Wards, there among his own
kind, the maladjusted, the freaks, the men and women who were rebels
and who could never fit into the social order.

After five weeks of basic training, Deker was with Giles, the chief
astrogator, a fiery little man with flaring yellow hair, talking. They
were aboard the Ship, standing on the little balcony ridge outside the
control turret. Through the opaque glassite dome around them, they
could see the distant gleam of the colossal city reflecting like a
gigantic jewel against the night sky, and reflecting back again on the
yellow desert sand on which the Ship's cradle had been constructed.

Giles was slowly recovering from a persecution complex contracted
before he had finally volunteered as a crewman on the Ship. All the
Unstables who made up the crew of the Ship were extremely capable,
though neurotic. Deker had become pretty well acquainted with all of
them, except the captain.

Now all of them were aboard to stay. They could never set foot on
Earth again. During that week before blasting they were to acquaint
themselves thoroughly with the Ship and with their specific duties.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ship was a large blunt engine of inexhaustible atomic power,
gleaming silver and black, with a platinum hull insulating it against
heat. It could not be oxidized or burned.

It took Deker a long time to realize that he was assistant astrogator.
But it had been easy for him. His mind seemed keener and more flexible
now than it had ever been, fired with an enthusiasm he had never
imagined himself capable of feeling. He knew a sharp sense of growing
importance, of belonging, of serving a purpose.

The crew respected him for his knowledge and his mystery, a mystery
he could never clarify for them. They couldn't conceive of there ever
having been preceding cultures as great as he described.

But Deker had memories of many other kinds of social orders, including
those jumbled sovereign governmental ideologies existing even before
the Hundred Cities Federation--Democracy, Unionism, Syndicalism,
Communism, Fascism, and countless others. Deker could remember many
of them. And each had been a working system, including the Federated
Utopia of the Hundred Cities, a fact inconceivable to these people
of World City, or the City of Perl. His unbelievable revelations
were considered the delusions of a high neurotic or even a potential
psychotic.

"Space will cure you," they told him kindly.

He was convinced that it would. He knew that once out in space nothing
concerning Earth would be of any importance again. Anyway, they were
glad to be rid of him and the other Unstables. The Ship was the only
legal method they could utilize to rid their perfectly balanced order
of its erratic elements. Capital punishment was, of course, not only
illegal, but incomprehensible.

The only alternative to sending the Unstables away in the Ship were the
Reconditioning Wards, but these Unstables wouldn't recondition. They
either were completely negativistic, or they merely changed their form
of instability.

Deker had spent his time wandering through the Ship, luxuriating in its
beauty and gleaming utilitarian power, and he had become thoroughly
familiar with its most minute part. He had come to know every crew
member well, but he hadn't met the captain at all.

"The captain is a hard person to get along with," Giles was saying,
"even if you manage to meet informally."

"Why is the captain so hard to see?" asked Deker indifferently.

"I don't know, exactly," said the fiery little Giles. "They say the
captain is a brooding introspective neurotic, whatever that means.
Spends all the time alone."

"But the symptoms of Unstables," said Deker, "are symptoms of our
desire to escape World City and all the things it represents. Surely
the captain should have a new attitude now that we are getting away
from World City entirely."

Giles grinned slyly. "Deker, you have an amazingly intuitive grasp of
so many fields of learning, especially the workings of the human mind.
Sometimes I almost feel that you are a traveler through time, that you
actually have known pasts and peoples of which we cannot even dream.
Anyway, maybe you can help the captain."

Giles looked at his chronodisk.

"The captain retires every night at precisely twenty-four hundred," he
said. "You still have an hour. I think it would be an excellent idea if
you talked with the captain. You have such a remarkable understanding
of mental processes that you might be of benefit. And it will be
unpleasant out there"--he motioned toward the stars--"with a captain
who remains a neurotic. It might be disastrous."

Deker saw some kind of ulterior motive gleaming in Giles' eyes. He
shrugged.

"All right, Giles. I've got to meet this mysterious captain anyway. And
I'm sure he won't make the first gesture...."

Deker felt entirely at ease, confident, strong and proud in the brown
heavy-duty plasticloth space suit as he made his way to the Captain's
room. He knocked lightly on the metal door. There was a long pause.
Deker felt unexpectedly ill at ease as he hesitantly knocked again.
There was a tense feeling of suspense he could not analyze. And then
the captain opened the door and stood framed in its opening, looking at
him.

His mind reeled. He stumbled back, blinked, tried to speak. But he
could only gasp while his mind plummeted back through time to a wild
scene at the foothills of high mountains, a running stream, a singing
hunchback, a high lonely tower with an opening, an opening framing a
face.

This girl's--the captain's face!

Her red-gold hair. Her captain's uniform was a glossy black,
snug-fitting so that the highlights of her beautiful figure had a shine
on them. Her arrogant blue eyes--yes, they were the same blue--were
brooding as they studied him.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was Perl! Physically, there was not one minute difference.
Everything about her was Perl, except the uniform. The red-gold hair,
the blue eyes, the probing gaze, other intangible qualities only Deker
would remember. It seemed to be Perl, but Deker had grown suspicious,
distrustful of reality evaluated temporally.

[Illustration: Everything about her except the glossy, shining uniform
was--Perl.]

The cycles spiraled without end, with inevitable repetitions. Only
details seemed to alter. But given time, even all the most minute
details might return.

Deker brushed a hand over his face.

"Perl--" he mumbled once, then managed to get hold of himself,
stiffened, bowed slightly. "I thought it was about time I introduced
myself," he said. "I'm Deker. Perhaps you've heard about the man who
has been sleeping in the encystment vault. I am that man."

She stepped aside, invited him in. It was a small, delicate, feminine
room, draped in blue. Incense burned. She motioned to a capacious
couch, but she sat in a deep chair facing him. Her voice was soft,
gentle, persuasive.

"You are the man who speaks of lost times no one believes ever were?"

"Yes," said Deker in a husky whisper. Even her voice was Perl's voice.

"What would you say if I said that I believed you--Deker?" Her eyes
were infinitely soft, deep, as he looked into them. "For I do believe
your tales of the past. For I have dreamed the same things. All the
horror and darkness and terrifying vistas which you have spoken of, I
have experienced in my dreams."

"I've traveled a long time, come a long way," said Deker. "But this
ship ends the quest for me. The Ship is the chimera and we have found
it. Maybe out there, given time, I can make you understand. All these
years--eons--I've been trying to escape. I'm beginning to realize now
what I was trying to escape from. It was Earth."

"Then this isn't the end for you--for us, Deker. But the beginning...."

The endlessness of space opened for Deker after that. The feeling
of futility and of uselessness, and of not belonging, the sense of
hopeless dusty dreariness and despair of spinning cycles--it all
dropped away with the fading dull red ball of Earth. And he knew none
of it would ever obsess him again.

The feeling of inferiority, of being an abnormality--that fell away
too. For he knew that he and his kind did belong, that they belonged
to something incredibly vaster than the smug immediacy of the systems
which had created them, and then rejected them as unfit.

They would die down there in their own narrow complacency and
auto-delusion. His kind would always rebel and escape into space. His
kind had always rebelled, sought newness, and escape from the dull
finalities in search of the broader meanings.

His arm was about Perl's slim waist. She used another name now, but
to him she would always be Perl. Perl the Anarch who had changed, and
saved the human species from decay and death. They stood in the control
turret watching the receding Earth in the ultraview screen.

Dimly, in a haze, Deker saw the sun setting beyond the Earth,
surrounded by its corona and zodiacal light. Beyond it he saw the moon,
slightly blue, with a white rim. The Earth was all dark except where
the sun splattered down on its far half, a pool of light, bright white
in its center and graduating outward into dissipating orange and brown.

Then the whole scene was gone, and there was a mind-reeling blackness
with only stark cold dots of untwinkling white.

Deker looked at the blue and white astro-charts. His arm tightened
about Perl's pliant waist. The Earth was gone. And he knew that it was
gone forever.

"This is what we've been searching for," he heard himself whispering.
"They'll never have any problem with people like us any more. It was a
disease. It's cured now. We were Earthbound, but now we're free!"

Venus waited for Deker and the captain he called Perl, and the rest of
the crew of the Ship. And beyond Venus--infinity.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLEEPER IS A REBEL ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
